README.md, before:

THIS TEXT IS A WORK IN PROGRESS... 

# Welcome to documenta?! #
An open research about documentation practices in laboratories. 

## What is it about? [vision statement] ##
The idea is to get to know, study and showcase documentation practices developed by practitioners in labs, specially citizen labs, makerspaces, hackerspaces, informal educational spaces, etc. We believe that proper documentation of projects is crucial in opening opportunities to engage persons, share visions, foster communities, inspire initiatives and reproduce objects. Documentation is not the master of universe. It does not capture everything that is happening between us, with us, on us. But it helps us tracking the reasons why we obtain certain findings in our experiments, prototipes, communities. Also, it allows us to testify and learn from those who came before us, improving our initiatives.

I believe that we can do it better if we do it openly, together and most of all, caring for each other. Since my background is the academic culture, mostly based on competitiveness and secrecy, I believe that this open research will specially deal with three challenges: 

1) To acknowledge, compensate, and/or otherwise reward contributors equitably for their work.
2) To be transparent with contributors and users about how my projects’ decision-making, information-sharing, and content-sharing.
3) To create multiple, inclusive pathways to participate in my projects and celebrate the accomplishments of people from all the forms of diversity we hold together.

## Why? ##

In 2015, I was researching about open laboratory notebooks (indeed open notebook science proposed by Jean-Claude Bradley) with Antonio Lafuente's supervision in Madrid and he introduced me to the citizen laboratories, specially Medialab-Prado (MLP). He suggested me to expand my research scope to informal spaces that explore collaborative experimentation and learning such as medialabs, citilabs, hacklabs and maker spaces.  

Suggestion accepted, I started participating in some researches conducted by MLP mediators-researchers in order to observe the knowledge production process and their documentation practices. I discovered that they fully embrace the idea of laboratory since it represents an experimental approach in the sense that allows us to explore something without be able to anticipate the final result, as a possibility of producing collectively new knowledge by trial and error. But when it comes to documenting, they do not follow the standard of keeping laboratory notebooks. 

In some extent, the idea of lab notebooks sounded quite weird. When I explained it, they understood as a bureaucratic activity or something only related to academic research. On the other hand, there was a unanimous perception that they must share information about the activities they were conducting. The problem here is that, beyond work overload, the dominant logic of the cultural sector reduces documentation to a past activity, a kind of proof that something was done or accomplished. Rarely it was identified as a "technology of aspiration "(APPADURAI, 2003) that looks at the future.

In may 2015, I examined 120 initiatives published on the “Medialab Prado Comunidad” - an online plattform created in 2013 as "a space for share projects, work together and meet other users". Or "a social network dedicated specifically to the online collaborative work that aims to be an extension of the work that is done in the workshops, offering contact and documentation for medialab users so that “the most important information for group operation is easily available to all” (Medialab-Prado, 2013). I identified that the great majority of the project documentation rested on the first description of initiatives in order to attract collaborators. We could only have an idea of the starting point of the initiatives, but we can not follow their developments or access findings. The basic structure was: a) projects name, b) general escription; c) tools and materials; d) promoter;  e) collaborators; f) links; g) images. I also noticed low interaction among the participants through of the platform, finding a very small number of posts and documents upload. 

To be continued ... 


## Who proposes? ##
I am Brazilian researcher, working on the information science field, and I have studied "citizen laboratories" documentation practices in Spain and Brazil during my PHD process. I also was team member of Ubatuba Open Science Project, an action research that related open science with development issues. Since I study the commons perspective and practices as a third way of governance of the commons, I would like to understand...  

## Practices to be studied ##

#### Open notebook science ####   
"According to Jean Claude Bradley (Sept, 26, 2006), open notebook science refers to “a way of doing science in which — as best as you can — you make all your research freely available to the public and in real time”. It claims for a new form of formal communication between scientists, enriched by the early opening of information and results. It demands a new practice: making available in real time the totality of scientists’ laboratory notebooks on online platforms, as well as free licenses that make possible the access, reuse and redistribution of content by any person or automated system. This innovation does not only include raw data and information about positive results of a given piece of scientific research; it also disseminates partial status, weaknesses and challenges at a stage when they have not yet been solved by scientists. Sharing the “backstage” of science, its intermediate stages, doubts and difficulties is part of Bradley’s strategy aimed at promoting a “faster science, better science” and at attracting collaborators and resources in order to solve scientific questions challenging him.

Bradley defined open notebook science in the following way:

[…] I will use the term Open Notebook Science, which has not yet suffered meme mutation. By this I mean that there is a URL to a laboratory notebook (like this) that is freely available and indexed on common search engines. It does not necessarily have to look like a paper notebook but it is essential that all of the information available to the researchers to make their conclusions is equally available to the rest of the world. Basically, no insider information. (Bradley, Sept, 26, 2006)

Starting from this objective, Bradley later on focused his work on the development of open antimala (...)open notebook science’s origin is situated at the junction of new forms of collaboration in digital environments and the emergence of a free digital culture. Its first practices were carried out in the context of the UsefulChem project, launched in 20059, to fulfill Bradley’s personal objective of “making a useful contribution to society” because “In thinking about what has meaning for me as a scientist, I realized that the work I was doing wasn’t having the kind of impact that I would like it to have, and it was not benefitting mankind in the way I would have hoped. I concluded that this was partly a consequence of secrecy” (Bradley, Sep 2010)." (Clinio, Albagli, 2017) (https://journals.openedition.org/rfsic/3186#text)

#### Doc.art ####
"Documenting is not recording facts but showing processes. It is not an occupation, but an attitude towards life: a mentality rather than a technique. The processes of collective construction and collaborative prototyping are invisible or disappear after the presence of the deliverable because those processes escape conventional documentation tools. The EduCaaS team, in collaboration with Antonio Lafuente, is designing a digital tool that makes these processes visible and also models them so that they can be replicated, modified and evaluated. This tool is a fundamental piece in citizen laboratories, understood as listening devices and open spaces of collective creation fundamental for the democratic renewal of our society." (Doc.art, 2017) (https://github.com/docART/documentacion) (See also the video - https://vimeo.com/249640649)

#### Relatograma ####
According to Carla Boserman, a relatograma is one possibility of visual narration that contains drawings and words to register a situation where there are people doing, explaining or sharing things. If nowadays we have many digital technologies to record events as facts, the relatograma aims to register “what does not appear in the photo". It documents (or tell us) how things happen from the point of view of an observer who does not try to make a neutral, objective report or recreate unattainable objectivity. On the contrary, the rapporteur assumes a committed position, from his own unique and situated perspective, to composes a scene that depends on her/his capacity to see  (and document). In that sense, elaborating a relatograma is closed related to the rapporteur's sensitivity to highlight details, give voice to the secondary, speak about emotions, disagreements, doubts, jokes, unforeseen events etc. Its potential is about trying to draw how prototyping and social innovation activities happens.

#### ENTER HERE YOUR SUGGESTIONS ####


## Motivations ##

## Goals ##

## Resources ##

## Procedures ##

## Schedule ##

## Needs ##
Help, I need somebody. Help,  not just anybody. Help), you know I need someone. Heeeeeeeeeeeeeeeelp. :) 

## Staff ##
 * Anne Clinio
 * Put your name here... :)

## Contact ##
  Anne Clinio - anneclinio at gmail dot com

## Initial literature ## 

 ### Open notebook science ###

***Beyond the Dichotomy between Natural and Knowledge Commons: Reflections on the IAD Framework from the Ubatuba Open Science Project*** - Anne Clinio, Sarita Albagli - Presents a critical analysis of the possibilities and limits of the Institutional Analysis and Development (IAD) framework, proposed by Elinor Ostrom and team, specially addressing the mutual relations between natural and knowledge commons. It results from an action-research project on the role of open science (OS) in development, carried out in the municipality of Ubatuba, on the North Coast of the State of São Paulo, Brazil, in 2015-2017. The work involved: systematizing the literature on the IAD framework; mapping and selecting literature representative of other theoretical and conceptual approaches; critically using and adapting the framework to the case studied. The project provided the opportunity to observe how these dynamics take place in a relatively small-scale (while heavily interconnected) context. While the IAD framework helped us to analyse the institutional, political, and governance issues affecting knowledge production and circulation, we observed the higher complexity of our action arena, shedding light on the fact that natural and knowledge commons are the two dimensions of the same “commoning” process. - https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01816671v1

***Open notebook science as an emerging epistemic culture within the Open Science movement*** - Anne Clinio, Sarita Albagli - The paper addresses the concepts and practices of “open notebook science” (Bradley, 2006) as an innovation within the contemporary Open Science movement. Our research points out that open notebook science is not an incremental improvement, but it is a new “literary technology” (Shapin, Shaffer, 1985) and main element of a complex open collaboration ecosystem that fosters a new epistemic culture (Knorr-Cetina, 1999). This innovation aimed to move from a “science based on trust” to a science based on transparency and data provenance - a shift that recognizes the ability of scientists in performing experiments, but mostly, values their capacity of documenting properly what they say they have done. The theoretical framework was built with the notion of epistemic culture (Knorr-Cetina, 1999) and the “three technologies” perspective used by Shapin and Shaffer (1985) to describe the construction by natural philosophers of “matter of fact” as “variety of knowledge” so powerful that became synonymous of science itself. Empirically, we entered the “open lab” through a netnography that led us to understand that the epistemic culture being engendered by its practitioners is based on a “matter of proof”. - https://journals.openedition.org/rfsic/3186

***Why open notebook science?*** - Anne Clinio - http://livroaberto.ibict.br/handle/1/1061


### Doc.art ###
 
***Manual Doc.art*** - Antonio Lafuente - https://www.academia.edu/36042065/manual_docART

***El arte de documentar*** - Antonio Lafuente, David Gómez, Juan Freire - https://www.academia.edu/37938364/El_arte_de_documentar

***Los laboratorios ciudadanos y el anarchivo de los comunes*** - Antonio Lafuente - Link: https://www.academia.edu/14834106/Los_laboratorios_ciudadanos_y_el_anarchivo_de_los_comunes

***Como hacer un prototipo?*** - Antonio Lafuente, Mariana Cancela - https://www.academia.edu/30989047/C%C3%B3mo_hacer_un_prototipo

### Relatograma ###
***Cómo hacer un relatograma*** - Carla Boserman - http://laaventuradeaprender.intef.es/documents/10184/72154/Guia-LADA_Como-hacer-un-relatograma.pdf

***Relatogramas: Dibujo y cognición en laboratorios sin muros*** - Carla Boserman - Máster en Comunicación, Cultura y Ciudadanía Digitales, Universidad Rey Juan Carlos, 2013


## License ##
CC by-sa-nc

Commit message:

add how to join in

README.md, after:

# Welcome to documenta?! #
An open research about documentation practices in laboratories. 

## What is it about? [vision statement] ##
The idea is to get to know, study and showcase documentation practices developed by practitioners in labs, specially citizen labs, makerspaces, hackerspaces, informal educational spaces, etc. We believe that proper documentation of projects is crucial in opening opportunities to engage persons, share visions, foster communities, inspire initiatives and reproduce objects. Documentation is not the master of universe. It does not capture everything that is happening between us, with us, on us. But it helps us tracking the reasons why we obtain certain findings in our experiments, prototipes, communities. Also, it allows us to testify and learn from those who came before us, improving our initiatives.

I believe that we can do it better if we do it openly, together and most of all, caring for each other. Since my background is the academic culture, mostly based on competitiveness and secrecy, I believe that this open research will specially deal with three challenges: 

1) To acknowledge, compensate, and/or otherwise reward contributors equitably for their work.
2) To be transparent with contributors and users about how my projects’ decision-making, information-sharing, and content-sharing.
3) To create multiple, inclusive pathways to participate in my projects and celebrate the accomplishments of people from all the forms of diversity we hold together.

## Why? ##

In 2015, I was researching about open laboratory notebooks (indeed open notebook science proposed by Jean-Claude Bradley) with Antonio Lafuente's supervision in Madrid and he introduced me to the citizen laboratories, specially Medialab-Prado (MLP). He suggested me to expand my research scope to informal spaces that explore collaborative experimentation and learning such as medialabs, citilabs, hacklabs and maker spaces.  

Suggestion accepted, I started participating in some researches conducted by MLP mediators-researchers in order to observe the knowledge production process and their documentation practices. I discovered that they fully embrace the idea of laboratory since it represents an experimental approach in the sense that allows us to explore something without be able to anticipate the final result, as a possibility of producing collectively new knowledge by trial and error. But when it comes to documenting, they do not follow the standard of keeping laboratory notebooks. 

In some extent, the idea of lab notebooks sounded quite weird. When I explained it, they understood as a bureaucratic activity or something only related to academic research. On the other hand, there was a unanimous perception that they must share information about the activities they were conducting. The problem here is that, beyond work overload, the dominant logic of the cultural sector reduces documentation to a past activity, a kind of proof that something was done or accomplished. Rarely it was identified as a "technology of aspiration "(APPADURAI, 2003) that looks at the future.

In may 2015, I examined 120 initiatives published on the “Medialab Prado Comunidad” - an online plattform created in 2013 as "a space for share projects, work together and meet other users". Or "a social network dedicated specifically to the online collaborative work that aims to be an extension of the work that is done in the workshops, offering contact and documentation for medialab users so that “the most important information for group operation is easily available to all” (Medialab-Prado, 2013). I identified that the great majority of the project documentation rested on the first description of initiatives in order to attract collaborators. We could only have an idea of the starting point of the initiatives, but we can not follow their developments or access findings. The basic structure was: a) projects name, b) general escription; c) tools and materials; d) promoter;  e) collaborators; f) links; g) images. I also noticed low interaction among the participants through of the platform, finding a very small number of posts and documents upload. 

To be continued ... 

## How can I join in? ##
Since it is my first open project, I don´t have a stable roadmap. I am still learning with the help of Mozilla Open Leaders 7 (Design and Concur groups) and my mentor Felipe De Santo. The main idea is to connect with people and projects that have a common interests on documentation. For instance, you can particpate by suggesting practices and groups to be studied or invited to join in, studying this practices together, recommending literature about documentation process, sharing your insights or experience about documentation, helping enhance participation, equity and inclusion. 

## Who proposes? ##
I am Brazilian researcher, working on the information science field, and I have studied "citizen laboratories" documentation practices in Spain and Brazil during my PHD process. I also was team member of Ubatuba Open Science Project, an action research that related open science with development issues. Since I study the commons perspective and practices as a third way of governance of the commons, I would like to understand...  

## Practices to be studied ##

#### Open notebook science ####   
"According to Jean Claude Bradley (Sept, 26, 2006), open notebook science refers to “a way of doing science in which — as best as you can — you make all your research freely available to the public and in real time”. It claims for a new form of formal communication between scientists, enriched by the early opening of information and results. It demands a new practice: making available in real time the totality of scientists’ laboratory notebooks on online platforms, as well as free licenses that make possible the access, reuse and redistribution of content by any person or automated system. This innovation does not only include raw data and information about positive results of a given piece of scientific research; it also disseminates partial status, weaknesses and challenges at a stage when they have not yet been solved by scientists. Sharing the “backstage” of science, its intermediate stages, doubts and difficulties is part of Bradley’s strategy aimed at promoting a “faster science, better science” and at attracting collaborators and resources in order to solve scientific questions challenging him.

Bradley defined open notebook science in the following way:

[…] I will use the term Open Notebook Science, which has not yet suffered meme mutation. By this I mean that there is a URL to a laboratory notebook (like this) that is freely available and indexed on common search engines. It does not necessarily have to look like a paper notebook but it is essential that all of the information available to the researchers to make their conclusions is equally available to the rest of the world. Basically, no insider information. (Bradley, Sept, 26, 2006)

Starting from this objective, Bradley later on focused his work on the development of open antimala (...)open notebook science’s origin is situated at the junction of new forms of collaboration in digital environments and the emergence of a free digital culture. Its first practices were carried out in the context of the UsefulChem project, launched in 20059, to fulfill Bradley’s personal objective of “making a useful contribution to society” because “In thinking about what has meaning for me as a scientist, I realized that the work I was doing wasn’t having the kind of impact that I would like it to have, and it was not benefitting mankind in the way I would have hoped. I concluded that this was partly a consequence of secrecy” (Bradley, Sep 2010)." (Clinio, Albagli, 2017) (https://journals.openedition.org/rfsic/3186#text)

#### Doc.art ####
"Documenting is not recording facts but showing processes. It is not an occupation, but an attitude towards life: a mentality rather than a technique. The processes of collective construction and collaborative prototyping are invisible or disappear after the presence of the deliverable because those processes escape conventional documentation tools. The EduCaaS team, in collaboration with Antonio Lafuente, is designing a digital tool that makes these processes visible and also models them so that they can be replicated, modified and evaluated. This tool is a fundamental piece in citizen laboratories, understood as listening devices and open spaces of collective creation fundamental for the democratic renewal of our society." (Doc.art, 2017) (https://github.com/docART/documentacion) (See also the video - https://vimeo.com/249640649)

#### Relatograma ####
According to Carla Boserman, a relatograma is one possibility of visual narration that contains drawings and words to register a situation where there are people doing, explaining or sharing things. If nowadays we have many digital technologies to record events as facts, the relatograma aims to register “what does not appear in the photo". It documents (or tell us) how things happen from the point of view of an observer who does not try to make a neutral, objective report or recreate unattainable objectivity. On the contrary, the rapporteur assumes a committed position, from his own unique and situated perspective, to composes a scene that depends on her/his capacity to see  (and document). In that sense, elaborating a relatograma is closed related to the rapporteur's sensitivity to highlight details, give voice to the secondary, speak about emotions, disagreements, doubts, jokes, unforeseen events etc. Its potential is about trying to draw how prototyping and social innovation activities happens.

#### ENTER HERE YOUR SUGGESTIONS ####


## Motivations ##

## Goals ##

## Resources ##

## Procedures ##

## Schedule ##

## Needs ##
Help, I need somebody. Help,  not just anybody. Help), you know I need someone. Heeeeeeeeeeeeeeeelp. :) 

## Staff ##
 * Anne Clinio
 * Put your name here... :)

## Contact ##
  Anne Clinio - anneclinio at gmail dot com

## Initial literature ## 

 ### Open notebook science ###

***Beyond the Dichotomy between Natural and Knowledge Commons: Reflections on the IAD Framework from the Ubatuba Open Science Project*** - Anne Clinio, Sarita Albagli - Presents a critical analysis of the possibilities and limits of the Institutional Analysis and Development (IAD) framework, proposed by Elinor Ostrom and team, specially addressing the mutual relations between natural and knowledge commons. It results from an action-research project on the role of open science (OS) in development, carried out in the municipality of Ubatuba, on the North Coast of the State of São Paulo, Brazil, in 2015-2017. The work involved: systematizing the literature on the IAD framework; mapping and selecting literature representative of other theoretical and conceptual approaches; critically using and adapting the framework to the case studied. The project provided the opportunity to observe how these dynamics take place in a relatively small-scale (while heavily interconnected) context. While the IAD framework helped us to analyse the institutional, political, and governance issues affecting knowledge production and circulation, we observed the higher complexity of our action arena, shedding light on the fact that natural and knowledge commons are the two dimensions of the same “commoning” process. - https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01816671v1

***Open notebook science as an emerging epistemic culture within the Open Science movement*** - Anne Clinio, Sarita Albagli - The paper addresses the concepts and practices of “open notebook science” (Bradley, 2006) as an innovation within the contemporary Open Science movement. Our research points out that open notebook science is not an incremental improvement, but it is a new “literary technology” (Shapin, Shaffer, 1985) and main element of a complex open collaboration ecosystem that fosters a new epistemic culture (Knorr-Cetina, 1999). This innovation aimed to move from a “science based on trust” to a science based on transparency and data provenance - a shift that recognizes the ability of scientists in performing experiments, but mostly, values their capacity of documenting properly what they say they have done. The theoretical framework was built with the notion of epistemic culture (Knorr-Cetina, 1999) and the “three technologies” perspective used by Shapin and Shaffer (1985) to describe the construction by natural philosophers of “matter of fact” as “variety of knowledge” so powerful that became synonymous of science itself. Empirically, we entered the “open lab” through a netnography that led us to understand that the epistemic culture being engendered by its practitioners is based on a “matter of proof”. - https://journals.openedition.org/rfsic/3186

***Why open notebook science?*** - Anne Clinio - http://livroaberto.ibict.br/handle/1/1061


### Doc.art ###
 
***Manual Doc.art*** - Antonio Lafuente - https://www.academia.edu/36042065/manual_docART

***El arte de documentar*** - Antonio Lafuente, David Gómez, Juan Freire - https://www.academia.edu/37938364/El_arte_de_documentar

***Los laboratorios ciudadanos y el anarchivo de los comunes*** - Antonio Lafuente - Link: https://www.academia.edu/14834106/Los_laboratorios_ciudadanos_y_el_anarchivo_de_los_comunes

***Como hacer un prototipo?*** - Antonio Lafuente, Mariana Cancela - https://www.academia.edu/30989047/C%C3%B3mo_hacer_un_prototipo

### Relatograma ###
***Cómo hacer un relatograma*** - Carla Boserman - http://laaventuradeaprender.intef.es/documents/10184/72154/Guia-LADA_Como-hacer-un-relatograma.pdf

***Relatogramas: Dibujo y cognición en laboratorios sin muros*** - Carla Boserman - Máster en Comunicación, Cultura y Ciudadanía Digitales, Universidad Rey Juan Carlos, 2013


## License ##
CC by-sa-nc
